I. Flying to Lukla

In Kathmandu, I watch a stout Nepalese woman collect her cargo after it passes through the security x-ray machine. She grabs at huge mesh bags of potatoes and garlic while unmarked brown boxes, bursting-full white burlap sacks and strangely shaped objects wrapped in newspaper topple all around her, exiting the x-ray machine with no obvious owners. Nobody is concerned. Cargo far outstrips people in this airport which hosts a dozen check-in counters lining the walls, many unmanned and all single-serving size, more like booths at a carnival than any kind of official enterprise. Despite the growing number of inanimate objects being shoveled in, the room bustles with activity. Sherpas carry their unwieldy sacks or unmarked boxes or giant containers of cooking oil here and there, hardly making a dent in the growing pile, while people in various kinds of uniform—-suits, reflector vests, pilot jackets—-walk around with no obvious concern for checking us in.

My boyfriend Oscar and I are flying to Lukla to begin a trek in Himalayas. The decision to fly to this town, 2800m above sea level and set deep in mountains known for their dangerous weather, was made amid many light-hearted comments by Oscar about how dying by fire is most certainly the worst way to go, slightly worse than drowning and far and away worse than freezing to death in a crevasse which, he noted pointedly, could be a possibility on this trip too if we wanted. We buried our fear amongst pleasant jokes with my older brother about the terrifying airstrip in Lukla. It is only about ten times longer than the tiny planes they put you in and set at a twelve degree upwards angle to help slow the plane such that it doesn’t crash straight into the mountain in which the tiny town of Lukla is precipitously set. Waiting to be checked in, amidst the chaos of the domestic terminal of Kathmandu, which looks suspiciously unfinished, I worry about exactly whose hands I am about to place my life in.

Eventually a woman in a sharp suit takes pity on us, exchanges our proof of ticket purchase for two large blue bookmarks stamped with the flight number, 22, and writes down our names and passport numbers on a piece of paper titled ‘Passenger List.’ She weighs each of our packs before whisking them away and returning to weigh us. I am delighted that they are weighing things, though mildly concerned that nothing is recorded. 

From here we enter the departure terminal, which involves walking through a metal detector which beeps when I go through it and results in a perfunctory but intimate pat down. The departure terminal is merely another unfinished large room in which a variety of broken lights hang from the ceiling and a pleasant family of pigeons enjoy watching us from the rafters. We spend our time eyeing the other trekkers, questioning their and our choices of shoes and wondering if they are trekking independently like us or if their guide is already at Lukla, patiently waiting for his gaggle of Westerners to slough through his native lands. We stare in jealous awe at the genius of an older woman who brightly opens a large tupperware container of homemade cookies. Since waking at 5am, we each have had exactly one small, piping-hot cup of chai, bought from a withered old lady sitting at the entrance to the airport with utterly enormous thermoses of milk and tea. It was sweet and delicious and more than fight against my hunger increased it ten fold. 

My nervousness about dying by fire if the plane crashes, somewhat expectedly, into the mountainside just shy of the runway because the clouds came in and the pilots land by sight alone does nothing to help my low blood sugar. Or perhaps it is the other way around.

Mostly we wait. My mind is numbed by the cold. I have stupidly left my jacket in my pack and the bitter Nepalese morning is not at all stifled by being indoors. I overhear a woman explaining that the cabin will not be pressurized and, I infer, not heated. I warm up by again envisioning our plane crashing, bracing myself for the impact in the expected head-between-the-knees maneuver and predicting my chances of survival, both from the crash and then, making it through that, from escaping the plane before its gas tanks blows up. The fantasy is still vague. I haven’t yet seen the plane.

Flight 22 is called. Ten of us exit the building and pile onto a bus, which is driven in a large arc around planes of various sizes on the tarmac. We pull up to a small, boxy plane with landing wheels jutting out from the main body and a tail spur tied down to the plane with loose wires. I see seven windows on one side. A tank parks itself near the left wing. A man walks up a small metal step-stool with a large hose from the tank in hand and threads it into a connector on a wing. Simultaneously a generator parks itself next to the cockpit and another man plugs in its three-phase connector to a socket just north of the cockpit door. Our bus inexplicably pulls away, we circle a slightly bigger plane, shinier and cleaner, and return to our comparatively dumpy one. Now cargo is being chucked into a luggage compartment just behind the passenger segment, the burlap sacks thrown in with the hiking packs and and duffel bags and there is no way it will all fit back there, I think, especially given the way the men throw it in haphazardly.

I can’t decide if I want the bigger or smaller plane. The bigger plane is sturdier, has more inertia, and is more likely to make it through a storm or weather an emergency landing. The smaller plane is more nimble, can take off and land on a smaller airstrip. 

Soon we discover where the extra luggage goes. We file out of the bus and one by one step up in the plane, all hunched over and shuffling to take one of the eleven seats. Four seats line each side and a three-seater bench brings up the rear. Extra luggage is tied down wherever it fits, mostly ahead of the two rows and behind. I get the last seat on the left and buckle in. A single, red-lipped hostess walks down the single aisle with a straw basket of cotton balls and milk toffees. I follow suit of the others, grabbing cotton balls to plug my ears and a milk toffee for my nerves. She barely makes it to the back of the plane before the propellors start thundering, an utter roar that sends her quickly to her seat. Then it sends us speeding down the unmarked tarmac and, in hardly any time at all, takes us to the air smoothly.

We soar over Kathmandu, its rectangular buildings sporting out-jutting windows and a variety of pastel colors, creams and browns and pinks and yellows and blue, a great patchwork of a city. The buildings are multi-story and slightly off kilter with each other like an absurd construction set for children. They fan out in all directions, then thin, then disappear as the land becomes green and brown and mountainous. For a while there is nothing but hills and the speckled pattern of green trees far below, then we start to see the tan single-track roads zigzagging up and down between clusters of tin-roofed houses or sometimes between nothing at all. Now the hills start to rise, they get vigorous and serious and we get closer to them, our shadow a faint spot that crystallizes into the tiny, dark mimicry of our plane flying over the entrance to the Himalayas.

Finally I spot the snow-capped mountains in the distance, which melt first into a cascade of brown before disappearing into a blue haze, utterly disconnected from the hillside below. They look more like clouds than mountains, as effervescent and alluring as an oasis. I don’t see Lukla as we approach but suddenly the tarmac is below us and we rumble onto it, our roar growing as we desperately brake up the slope and sharply turn to the right onto a small apron of tarmac, big enough for four tiny planes. Immediately a waiting plane takes to the landing strip and from my window I see it shoot down the black road, lifting into the air mere meters before the tarmac itself disappears with the mountain leaving nothing but a straight drop down into the valley. 

—

We do not bother with the arrival terminal. Perhaps there is none. We walk off the plane into another collection of cargo, stacks and stacks of bottled soft drinks and cans of beer wrapped in grubby plastic. Luggage is piled alongside burlap sacks on long metal dollies. There is mild concern that people take their own bags. We are first asked to produce a baggage receipt by a man with a badge and then left to our own devices, no receipt collected. On the top of my pack, spilling on the the right shoulder strap and down the side onto my sandals, is a yellow goo, remnants of a cracked egg. Wizened trekkers covered their pack with its rain cover for the flight. Later I see the huge stacks of eggs in kitchens, twelve by twelve cardboard trays stacked twelve high with the occasional cracked egg on a side or on the top. We grab our packs and go.

The tarmac is surrounded by a high barbed wire fence and we exit via an open gate onto to a dusty stone path with which we will become intimately familiar. The path surrounds the fence. Around the path are buildings, only one deep, sporting names which will also merge into each other the longer we are here, Buddha Lodge, Everest Summit Lodge, Yeti Mountain Home Lodge. They curve up and around the airstrip, which despite its 12% incline is the flattest thing around. 

As we walk almost the full 180 degrees around the tarmac we are surrounded by people carrying the cargo. Some hold their loads on the shoulders but most use a thick strap over their forehead, leaning precipitously forward, a hand to the load on their back. They wear jeans or slacks or knock-off hiking pants, sweaters or fleece jackets, sneakers or cheap rubber sandals with socks or not. They are men and women, young or adult but never old. The path is rocky, dirty, mostly long shallow steps, and there is shit everywhere, though we don’t yet see any donkeys or yaks.

We ask for a room at The Nest Lodge and are told it costs 200 ruppees—two US dollars. We are astounded and try to immediately accept, but the man at the counter insists we see the room first. It is a crappy room with thin, unfinished plywood walls but it has two beds, a window, and a padlock. The economy here, I think, makes no sense at all. We drop our packs—we don’t even have to pay up front—and head out for breakfast at the Buddha Lodge which has a large, empty balcony where we can watch the planes taking off. Each plane takes off immediately after another has arrived. They drive out to the top of the tarmac strip, first facing the mountain and then making a sharp turn to face the airstrip. They rev their engines, the sound of the props filling the whole town, and then they rumble down the strip gaining speed. Each plane takes off with its own distance from the end of the runway, but they all take off before the end, lifting up into the thin mountain air to fly trekkers and porters home. Each flight is terrifying, deafening flirt with danger. The mountains don’t care for our human endeavors, but today they graced us with clear blue skies.

My heart is pounding. I feel nervous and can’t relax. We came to the Himalayas without a plan. We are on a three month break from work and know we love through-hiking, that intricate experience of living on the trail. We had had two beautiful, intense experiences hiking through the Sierra Nevada and figured if we could go anywhere to hike, we should go to the Himalayas. It is the mountain range that calls to all kinds of romantics for claiming nine of the ten highest peaks in the world, including the king of them all, Sagarmatha, or Mt Everest. It is grand and foreboding and we, like so many romantics, knew not a lick about it. 

We picked our trek, the three high passes, because it was meant to be one of the best in the world and because I could find decent information about it online. Though there would be lodges the whole way we could technically camp and optimistically brought our own gear. The trek would take us up to 5500m and over some glorious glaciers (name please) as we slunk our way over a tiny portion of the southern skirt of the Himalayas. We would pass close to Everest Base Camp. We would hike. We would see the most glorious mountains the world had ever made.

We hardly know the name of the three passes, those treacherous high points which are actually the lowest path through the mountain range. We had heard that one or two might be closed. We are there in early spring and the snow has yet to melt enough to permit a single, brave guide to make their tracks across the barren landscape such that numerous, inexperienced trekkers can diligently follow them. An avalanche in Gokyo valley is mentioned. But, we are invariably told, the weather changes. You won’t be there for many days. They may be open when you arrive.

-

After breakfast we explore Lukla, which apart from its ring of lodges is a single road we could follow all the way to Namche Bazar, the next town we head for, and past that, ambitiously of course, all the way to Mt. Everest. Instead we stop where the buildings end at a large white gateway adorned with the bust of a smiling woman and paintings of prayer-pressed hands and flowers. We are eager to keep going, to get out, to walk, but we spend a day in Lukla to acclimatize, letting our hearts catch up to us. 

The single road is chock full of shops which sell everything we might need and much we do not: sleeping mats, knock-off outdoor wear, ornate knives, duffel bags, various shampoos and lotions and sunblock, knit booties and gloves, running shoes, incense, yak soap, tea, one liter sealed bottles of water, canned fruit juice, soy sauce, corn grits, pasta, dry meat, corn flower, bouillon, almonds, porridge, crushed rice, ladles, plastic traps, candy bars, chapstick, hats of all kinds. We buy some muesli and trail mix and berries, along with a package of oreos which become increasingly stale with depth and which we eat in the early afternoon, mostly out of boredom. 

Of course, we are here for the mountains and we are in them, even if stationary. Across the valley they are close and vivid things, dark brown and jagged with depth from the snow that peppers to the top of them. We look at the peaks we can see from Lukla and understand that we will be trekking high above them. We walk up to a view point. Past the buildings we find steep and rocky trails, scraggly vegetation that holds on for dear life to the side of the mountain, gnarled trees staking their claim in this dangerous region. In the sun the heat bears down on us but in the shade or inside we chill easily. In the afternoon the clouds roll in, eye level and close but not touching us. Their hide our view of the mountains, turning everything past the runway into a grey empty void which at once feels right in front of my eyes and very distant. 

We see almost no one. Often we walk into a restaurant or shop and no one greets us. Occasionally a local comes out of the shadows or from next door, but mostly no one comes at all. We see no other trekkers until the afternoon, when we meet a pair of Japanese men who had walked from Jiri, the five-day hiking alternative to flying to Lukla. They are tired, but smiling at their big burgers and their big map. Towards the evening the local kids come out, toddlers who play roughly with stray puppies, eight year old girls in uniforms of red sweater, dark pleat skirt, and white pants, older boys in uniforms of slacks and dark blue sweaters, and older girls in matching uniforms to their younger counterparts, blowing bubbles with their gum and telling jokes in Nepalese which we understand to be dirty. We notice snooker tables under tarps around which men congregate, and a ping-pong table in the open which becomes popular around 5pm. Still, we don’t see many other hikers.

We eat dinner in what appears to be a woman’s home. Out front is a sign advertising ‘Sherpa Restaurant’ and listening a small number of meal options with pictures: Dal Bhaat, Buff Momos, Veg Fried Noodles, (more!)  As we enter the doorway, hung with fabric tied in a knot at chest level, we immediately hit a table pulled up against a bench on the right. Past that is a small counter and behind is her kitchen of clay stoves and huge pots. Across from the bench and table we sit at is another mirrored, and there sit two Nepalese men who talk to the woman non-stop and occasionally help translate what we say. Along with the woman, clearly in charge as she takes our orders and cooks, are two other woman who talk with her while she prepares our food. 

She prepares dal bhat for us, with which we become intimately familiar on our trip. It is a huge plate of white rice, sided with stir fried potatoes and bok choy and carrots and a bowl of lentil soup. She also grabs a handful of prepared momos, large dumplings stacked high in a mixing bowl covered in a towel, and reheats them in a bowl with a spicy soup. In addition she offers us hot milk tea out of an enormous thermos in glass mugs, which is sweet and dark. She speaks hardly a lick more English than the names of the dishes. The food is delicious and very salty. She offers us more stir fried veggies and rice for our dal bhat, more tea, and we eat until we are stuffed and then drink some more tea. 

Eventually the men leave and then so do the women. We are left finishing our scraps while the woman drinks her own concoction from a mug and stares calmly out the door into the street, or sometimes at us. Eventually we feel we should leave and she punches the cost of the meal into a calculator, the ubiquitous solution to transactions here. It is absurdly cheap. We want to pay her more but fear it would appear rude. We pay her and take our leave.

We return to our lodge, which is toasted by a large metal stove in the middle. We sit for a while, reading and writing, listening to the group of Australians to our right get to know each other, asking the group of Americans to our left, who had just returned from Everest Base Camp, what the conditions were like. We planned to the the Three High Passes trek, over Kong Ma La, Cho La, and Renjo Pass. We had read that it was the best trek in the Himalayas and one of the best treks in the world. The passes were all over 5000m and stunning. We could hike it without a guide because the trail is well traveled. We could easily hop up to Everest Base Camp if we wanted. Each pass is accessible independently so we could skip one or two if conditions or our bodies required. In addition, there was decent information about it online, unlike other recommended treks for which we could not even find maps.

But we had heard that maybe some of the passes would be closed. We started to ask everyone we conversed with, especially people on their way down, about the conditions. At breakfast a guide told us the 1st pass might be open, the 2nd probably not. He said we would definitely need crampons, big metal spikes attached to the bottom of your boots which we did not bring. At dinner a guide told us just Cho La Pass is still closed, but it might be open in a week. He implied the others were open. He clarified that ‘open’ meant guides had taken trekkers across it. The trail was laid in the snow. ‘Sometimes it takes a single crazy group to cross the pass, then everyone else can follow their steps safely.’ We would not be the crazy group — nor would we be the first followers. We wanted it to be open for several days, such that many groups had successfully passed. 

Our map gave us more reasons to have trepidation. It advised crampons along parts of the trail and sometimes ropes, warned of crevasses (stay left!) and slippery descents. Oscar began suggesting we don’t do them even if they are open, with good reasons: he knows next to nothing about glacier travel or crevasse rescue, and I know even less. We don’t have crampons or ropes or ice axes. The map confuses me. I read about the trek online, so did Oscar. No one ever mentioned needing crampons or knowing about crevasse rescue. There were warnings that the passes were dangerous, but merely to ‘seek local advice’. No one said ‘You don’t look like you should do the passes’ or ‘Do you know about crevasses rescue?’ Instead that stated which were open and which were not, and how they might open soon.

—

