We spent an extra day in Namche, hiking up 400m to the twin small towns of Khumde and Khunjing and back down again. Acclimatization is a funny thing. 

Then we head off optimistically to Pangboche, xxxm higher and another place we would spend two nights at. We start by heading towards the Everest Viewpoint then continue up the tan switch backs we can see edging off up the mountainside until they take off around the edge and deeper into the valley we’re crawling up.

Though the day hike the day before felt rough but doable, the hiking to Pangboche is brutal. I begin to move only at a glacial pace, every step the hardest I’ve ever taken, my mind growing angry and bitter, biting at Oscar at every chance I have, hating him, hating myself, feeling shitty and insecure. I begin to think that persistence is not enough to overcome my inherent weaknesses, female and small. I think that my sense of health and fitness is only great compared to my engineering friends who rarely exercise and sit at a desk all day. I feel like quitting. I want to tell Oscar that I can’t do it, that I loved the views from Namche and they struck me so deeply that I am content. I am ready to go down.

And this is all before we cross the bridge. We descend down to it and I sit at its entrance, letting the rocks take the weight of my pack. As I sit, panting with eyes dulling staring at the infinite tan path, Oscar investigates the tiny storefront directly facing the bridge. The Snickers bars cost 300 rupees—3 US dollars—and we can’t bring ourselves to buy them, not at the price of a meal. Sean offers us each a Snickers bar. He jokes about how many he had bought in Namche, first taking three and then five and then eventually emptying the whole box. 70 rupees each! he exclaims, as I shovel it into my face and feel the sugar slipping into me, bringing me back up to a place where I can laugh at jokes about glorious, savior Snickers bars.

Across the bridge is the true climb, a series of switchbacks high up into the mountainside and it is soul crushing. It is useless. Each step is so slow I worry I am not truly moving. Each breath feels useless against the fight to keep moving. I cannot even think about not enjoying. I feel the hate growing in the corners of my mind like fires which are fed by the endless path ahead. I hate it all. I hate Oscar for caring so much and for suggesting breaks. I hate Sean and Peter for climbing so easily. I hate the Himalayas. I hate myself for hating so much.

I think of Afek. He spent a night in Gorak Shep and didn’t sleep a wink. He said between the cold and the thin air and his racing heart he just stared at the back of eyelids for hours until finally the sun broke over the top of the mountains and he set off the descend as far and as fast as he could, easily hiking down in one day that which had taken him seven to ascend. Most people do not stop at Gorak Shep. They continue on to Everest Base Camp, three or four hours deeper up the Khumbu glacier, or they go up the extra 500m to the top of Kalapattar to see the grand view of Everest and its neighbors in panoramic display. Afek, a fit and thin yogi who hiked in tights and trail runners, had no regrets for skipping such sights. It was the most beautiful hike, he said.

I felt that way at Namche, I think. My mind was blown and gone away by the view some 2000m short of our goal, the passes, which still are not open and few are optimistic about. What am I here for? I am firm believer in type B fun, those things which are hard at the time but contain glorious rewards and are certainly fun to look back on. But Oscar and I are beginning to understand that we will never camp under the stars; there are so few good places to do so and we would have to set up camp after eating dinner at a lodge, in the dark, when the chill comes in and freezes our water and our toes. Instead we climb from village to village, seeing all these people and while we love our friends and their antics there are so many more people out here and it makes it feel crowded and false. I hate eating every meal in a lodge or restaurant. I hate walking the half days, arriving at the next town for lunch and not getting to hike until dark and allowing exhaustion to carry me easily into sleep. I want to be alone in the mountains and have their majesty overwhelm me. I want to walk naked. I am not sure I want this.

We reach Tengboche. We stop for lunch. We sit with Peter and Sean and find Alan, who is staying there, taking photographs of the monastery and waiting to ascend to be in time for a full moon over Everest. We make tea and eat double servings of dal bhat. I am regaled by my ability to lift my spirits, how quickly the torture of the uphill slips away from me and appears easy, doable, done. Up here the snow lays thick in places and we begin to see a different world. I remember that on the flats I immediately feel good, which is a sign that I don’t have altitude sickness but instead am just bearing the normal reaction to pushing my physical limits. I can do this. I am doing it. I will continue to do it.

-

It is the path up to Pangboche when I make my only real connection with a peak. Ama Dablam is the first mountain in Himalayas I can always recognize on the horizon. It comes and goes in the clouds and at the lodge in Pangboche I can see it from the restaurant. It is double peaked, the right sitting above the left. From the left the ridge line comes up steadily at 45 degrees, tops out in two small humps, then descends briefly before climbing up to the true peak, broad, half covered in ice, then it descends again, sharply, almost hyperbolic as it approach horizontal, cut off by its foothills. On a foothill to the left two Aussies I meet in the courtyard point out the Hillary stupa they hiked to earlier that day, 200m shy of the Ama Dablam base camp, through knee deep snow which prevented them from going higher.

I cannot figure out why it is so beautiful, why the mountain ranges astound me every time I raise my eyes to them. It is not like rivers or valleys, alpine flowers or glacial lakes, not like waterfalls, forests, they reign over all of that, they are not animal or plant, they are mineral, they are rock, they are earth, unthinking, weather, beaten, but perpetually above us. No one lives above treelike, nothing does, I think. Isolated.

Perhaps I am captured by their scale. They are the biggest thing I have ever seen. With their peaks they break up into nameable objects. They are longer than any manmade wonders. They are larger than the hills, they are where the valleys are not. They are the largest objects I can appreciate from the ground. Maybe there are forests or deserts which outsize them but only from the sky; there is nothing else from the ground which matches them. 

Their size means they are always distant. Their features are clearly defined—they are the clearest thing oh ever seen. It is not some mess of trees and leaves and dirt, some cacophony of rock and water, they are crisp edges and perfectly blank snow fields, ice flutes and ridge lines.

I was so content with the view from Namche but Pangboche shows me more. I am content here. But I know there is more to come. I know that I cannot stop, no matter how miserable the steps are to keep going. 

What I didn’t understand about all the worry over altitude sickness was that even if you don’t get sick, you’ll still feel like crap. That the hiking will be unfathomably hard even with the appropriate rest days and ascension schedule. It is our first night in Pangboche when I fully notice that my heartbeat never slows down but stays at a quick pace, even as I sleep. Every day both Oscar and I get mild headaches in the afternoon, which slip away in the night as our body tries to catch up. It never fully does.