We wake to the sounds of planes arriving and leaving, their thundering as loud in this plywood-walled room as outside. I did not sleep well. I woke to my own coughing or the sounds of scurrying in the walls. Could rats survive up here? I dreamt of missing a flight in Japan, from which we had just arrived a couple days ago, the receptionist at the check-in counter admonishing me for not being Japanese. My response to her, a similar accusation that she wasn’t very Western, came out of my mouth in the real world too, waking Oscar in the middle of the night who woke me, telling me I was having a nightmare, though I didn’t admit to him its mild nature.

We start hiking around 9am and as soon as we cross the gate the mountains shoot up around us, becoming huge and ever present. They are great beasts that we skirt around, climb up the edge of and then drop down, criss-crossing a roaring turquoise river on large suspension bridges dangling between the mountainsides, watching the thick steel cables sway back and forth precariously with the rhythm of our steps. When we stop I shoot looks back where we came, a great, hazy gap in the mountains that stretches out to the horizon. Forward is not nearly so clear: it is all dirt path into a closed panorama of mountains which shoot high into the sky to collect clouds fanning off their top.

We pass through village after village. We pass trains of yaks and donkeys. We pass and are passed by the porters, carrying their impossible loads, and by other groups of hikers. The other hikers are all shapes and sizes. We are certainly the youngest out there, most looking like fit thirty-year-olds, with the occasional group of old men and women who I am amazed can make the trek, because the hiking is hard.

And oh, is it hard. It is wonderful. Our path is all up the mountainside and down to the bridge, up over a mole hill and back down to a village. Every step feels like the last piece of myself that I can give to this place. Then, and it is the most magical thing in the world, I take another step, and another. I continually walk, all day, the exhaustion heaving at me like a hot breath down my back. This is why I love to hike. I love to feel empty and know I can go on. To think of nothing but the strange way my feet keep pushing me further.

We arrive in Monjo for lunch. It is the same elevation as Lukla. The entire morning we just dipped down into the valley and back up again, a great big exercise in foolishness, just to take us back where we started. We are close to Namche but decide to spend the night in Monjo. We both have mild headaches and it makes sense to climb slowly since we have plenty of time in our schedule. At the random lodge we pick we wash our clothes under a freezing cold tap. I wet my hair, massaging yak milk soak into it luxuriously and then washing it out while stamping my feet to distract myself from the chill. The clouds have settled in, starting to grey in the distance we could so easily pierce through in the morning. We hang our clothes on the fence but it is clear they won’t dry. I start to think we might be in the clouds. I can hardly see to the edge of the town.

We are the only ones staying in our lodge that night. Again, all the walls are paper thin. Being inside counts for nothing, the temperature drops quickly and we shuffle around in our down jackets, bumbling away the time until dinner by walking around the town. This means walking up and down the path to Namche, stopping where the buildings stop, passing the other lodges and admiring the fields of bok choy and potatoes, the only things I can see growing in the fields that pepper all the cities like large animal pens. All around is construction. Huge stone lodges are being built. Men are digging in the dirt to dredge up the stones, hitting them with huge hammers to send spindling cracks down their center and eventually leaving them in smaller pieces. 

As the light fades out behind the mountains we retire to our lodge, eating an hours long dinner, starting with a huge pot of sweet milk tea that we nurse as our food is cooked. We bring in our wet clothes. We discuss the hike, our plan for the next day, the food and the weather and our lives, we talk about building a house and returning to our jobs, we talk about the owners of the lodge. I talk about how I’m not tired, how I wished we could have hiked further. Then we slip into our sleep bags. I nurse my head ache and my nerves, which jitter like a live wire inside of me. But I sleep.

The next day the hike becomes more beautiful. We still cross the river, the bridges growing colorful with prayer flags tied along their railings which blow achingly in the wind like a tribute to color amidst this harshly tonal place which is all brown and green and now, as the climb begins, white. Ah yes, white mountains, snow capped and distant, form at the horizon when we can glance at it though our own beasts. Up the climb to Namche we overhear a guide point out Mt Everest, a little protrusion behind a range of white mountains blowing clouds off their peaks in the distance. We stare at the sucker, who looks meager compared to his closer compatriots and even to the rocky green-coated hills we ascend that day.

The final climb is brutal and I become all huffs and puffs, focusing on my feet which continually take me up. Finally we enter Namche, which materializes around the side of the mountain suddenly, and because it is Saturday we pass first through the market, a small landing on which Sherpas throw out their wears in bulk. Giant burlap sacks of lentils and peas and rice and sugar, along with cartons of candy bars and ledgers and pens and sneakers. Just past the market an Asian guy pokes his head of the the window and shouts down to us, recommending the lodge he’s calling from. We are struck by the offer and head down off the landing to enter the building from a small alley.

In the main room sits the woman of the house, breast feeding a baby while chattering to us about where we have come from while a toddler with the words ‘be happy’ in bright yellow on her sweater runs around saying ‘namaste’ to us over and over again. We properly meet Alan, a charming budding photographer from L.A., Peter, an Israeli living in Barcelona, and Sean, who willingly and actively denounces his home state of New Jersey. They are all independent trekkers like us, Alan trekking alone and Peter and Sean making an odd pair when they met in Indonesia, and they all have their sights set on the three high passes. They seem far more optimistic than us.

We drop our packs, a wonderful action, and head out to explore Namche. It is a wondrous and strange village, huge by Himalayan standards, built into the mountain like half of a bowl. The other half is empty space which stretches out to reach the huge mountain across from it. Because all the buildings are staggered up the mountainside, from every single location I look straight into the heart of the mountain across the valley, its ice gullies and snowy ridge, the clouds collecting lustfully at its peaks and in its snow fields, hovering at eye level and drifting right. It is hazy through the sun and impossibly huge and ever present in my vision.

In the center of the bowl, a hop and skip from the edge of the vacancy of the valley, is a large stupa, its blue eyes weary of the buildings built into the mountainside, its gold cap visible from all directions.

Everywhere in Namche are trekkers. Alone, couples, groups, people who have made new friends and people in the process of making more. We see our Japanese friends again. Free movies are advertised in two different cafes to draw in customers; all movies are Himalayan related. The place is packed with stores, putting the stores in Lukla to shame with their extensive options of high tech gear, some of which is genuine, and the even larger selection of candy. In addition you can get a wedding or birthday cake (order one day in advance, please,) along with a large selection of donuts which I am repeatedly told cost about as much as a meal and taste like cardboard. 

After lunch we walk up to the Everest viewpoint, though up hardly describes walking out of Namche to the strange, empty space atop and to the right of it. Even without my pack I am out of breath on the steps. Just past the entrance to the view point, confusedly surrounded by a tall fence, are three horses. Two are scuffling, throwing their heads wildly at each others necks and rearing up on their back legs while the third looks on cooly. We stand ten meters back on the path and watch them with the enthralled and concerned eyes of people who know nothing about horses. 

I did not come to the Himalayas to mauled by a horse, I think staunchly, and try to pursuit Oscar to leave with me until a man steps out of the foliage to swat the horses away, out of the gate and towards us, though they make a quick right turn into the trees and disappear. We step up and into the park.

There is no direction I face not filled to the brim with snow-speckled mountain side reaching right up and over the clouds which hang on the tops, obscuring ridge lines and distant peaks. They continually take my breath away and then fill my chest. The mountains here are grand beings, more fearsome than any peak I have seen. Crows fly across the view like black marks, defining the haze which dulls the view of them mountains but also makes them real, makes the crisp post-card images in town look like strange cousins with no life or majesty. 

We walk down into a venue with a museum and art store, the buildings surrounding a set of prayer wheels and another stupa. I can’t stand it. It is so beautiful I cry and then laugh and then cry. The stupa, with its blue eyes and golden cap, sits ahead of a short wall of prayer wheels, behind the majesty of the mountains, so close I can touch them, flattened by the haze, whisper in their slow moving clouds which whip center and right, the ridge line visible but the peak masked. The mountain is dark brown, shadowed in lack and sculpted in snow, in places large steep fields of it, elsewhere speckled with accent, showing where the sheer faces stop and jut out.

Behind, framed by a lodge with white, painted stone, green wood trim, and a blue tin roof and on the other side by short trees on a slow just to my right, is another peak, the right hidden in a flat mass of clouds, a portion of its jagged ridge line visible on the left before more clouds, stuck to a large snow field center-left. This one has less snow fields, more ridge lines coming down and out towards me. It is all slope, all angle. The visible ridge is outcropped rocks rising majestically, pint at the sky, tooth-like. 

This place astounds me. There are hours that go by, mostly at lunch or dinner, when I focus on my food, on Oscar, on our new friends or the friendly toddler, and suddenly I look out the window, I look up, and it is there again, the majesty, the brilliance of the mountains hits me so hard I want to cry. I cannot get over it. I do not want to. 

-

That night we meet Afek, a bustling Israeli who is on his way down from Gorak Shep, the highest village in the world and the last buildings before Everest Base Camp. He is euphoric from his hike and exclaims that he has no regrets for not going further, doing the passes, actually getting to base camp. So beautiful, he exclaims again and again, between exclaiming that he has some hash he wants to smoke before he flies back to Kathmandu and could we get some rolling papers and tobacco?

Oscar and I head out into Namche, stopping at a store that sells a little bit of everything under the sun with a talkative shop owner who says no, no, he doesn’t have any more rolling papers, let me look, no, no, but maybe I can find some, hm, and speedily talks to another Nepalese man in the store who exits and after some time returns with a beaten, dirty pack of rolling papers. We buy this and a pack of cigarettes.

As we roll the cigarettes we take turns in the kitchen with the woman and her mother, helping making the momos by placing the spicy filling into a piece of circular dough and clumsily closing it up. We are terrible at it but love being in the kitchen with these Nepalese women who think we are just the most hilarious people to have ever stopped by.

The woman at the lodge does not seem to care that we’re rolling cigarettes while she works away in the kitchen. We, however, are meagerly concerned about the toddler running around and the baby bustled up in layers upon layers of jackets and seated in the corner, staring at us quietly, so we sit at a bench looking out into Namche and smoke out the window. On my third inhale I cough a little, an obvious give-away to my lack of experience, but I laugh and joke and explain how my brother’s only knowledge about Nepal was that they have the best hash in the world and I’m sure this would be his one request of me.

It is at this point that we begin to swap our stories. They come out incomplete in conversation and are rounded out later on, as the five us of us, Alan, Peter, Sean, Oscar, and I, continually pass each other on the trail for the next three days, becoming a strange family united by the toddler constantly trying to steal our books and the baby who stares and stares and occasionally smiles and waves at us like he had never seen us before.

Alan, three years saving up in the military is now traveling until his money runs out (soon, he implores us,) trying to make something out of photography. He wields a huge digital Canon with a couple of a lenses that he got refurbished. He talks of trekking very, very slowly to Gorak Shep such that he has more time to acclimatize and can spend two nights there, capturing the milky way rising over Everest from the top of Kalapattar. 

Peter is, of all things, a trekking guide in the Peregrines for Isrealis, perhaps the most specific tourist industry job I’ve ever heard of. He originally was taking twelve months off to travel but cut it short—he has decided to go to acting school. Now his trip is six months long before heading back to Israel for auditions.

Sean is also playing the ‘until my money runs out’ game. He spent a couple years working for the EPA, which ironically meant he spent all his time surveying environments where toxic spills had occurred. He hadn’t expected that a degree in environmental science would so often put him in a haz-mat suit. He hated it. He has been teaching himself java and C++ and plans to get a job in software engineering when he returns. If that doesn’t work out, he has a friend in Austin who runs a veterinary clinic who says she might be able to get him a job vaccinating puppies. He says this with a wistful look in his eyes and adds that he thinks that must be the best job he’s ever heard of.

Afek, heading down and out to fly out of Lukla, remains a mystery to us. Instead, with Afek we talk about gear, about other hikes, about how history is taught in Israel. He tells us how he never once payed for a room, because it’s so early in the season that all the lodges are empty and you can stand to negotiate. He tells us how it’s starting to get full, how when he started it was so empty.

We explain that Oscar got a new job and it wouldn’t start until May, so he quit in January. I took three months off from my job and we picked some places to go based on whimsical thoughts like we liked hiking. Our version of the game, which included going back to well-defined jobs in the same city we left from, feels vacant compared to the endless traveling of the others. 

The hash is smooth and I don’t feel very high, just mellow and easy. I play with the toddler, her wide-eyed smile never fading as do those repetitive things that young children love. We play paddy-cake with little pieces of dough that she has stolen with the kitchen, and then, as I try to read, she continually grabs at that the book, in the repetitive way young children love, so I read out loud to her, which quickly bores her and she escapes to the kitchen.

The night is long and I sleep easily. But once again, I wake up with that pumping heart and my nerves racked up around my neck.

-